---
title: Sex Differences in Gene Regulatory Networks of Head & Neck Cancer
summary: Identifying sex differences in head & neck cancer using a network-based approach
tags:
- Cancer
- RNA-seq
- Gene Regulatory Network
date: "2019-05-01T00:00:00Z"

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).
external_link: ""

image:
  caption: Different modules detected comparing female and male in head & neck cancer case networks
  focal_point: Smart

links:
# - icon: twitter
#  icon_pack: fab
#  name: Follow
#  url: https://twitter.com/georgecushen
url_code: ""
url_pdf: ""
url_slides: ""
url_video: ""

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this project with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
slides: example
---

## Abstract
<br />

**Background**: There is some evidence that many diseases have different underlying mechanisms in men and women. This may demonstrate that there are some sex-specific mechanisms in gene regulatory networks. However, not many methods are developed to identify those differences in network structures, which makes it hard to understand sex-specific structures in diseases.

**Methods**: We used a network inference method called PANDA (Passing Attributes between Networks for Data Assimilation) to integrate expression data with transcription factor motif data and protein-protein interaction data. Then we ran a network comparison method called ALPACA (ALtered Partitions Across Community Architectures) to identify different modularity in the PANDA output networks. Using Cytoscape, we visualized the different communities generated by ALPACA and tagged them with Gene Ontology analysis results using ALPACA.

**Results**: We applied PANDA to model sex-specific networks in head and neck cancer. Then we applied ALPACA to capture different modularity between two sets of gene regulatory networks. By comparing the networks male versus female and case versus normal, we were able to identify differential-targeting patterns associated with specific sets of genes, which include defense response and RNA processing.

**Conclusions**: Network analysis has given insight into how gene regulatory networks differ in head and neck cancer, which might not be clear in gene expression analysis. We believe our network analysis has provided sex-specific regulatory mechanisms and suggested that this network analysis would be useful for identifying sex differences in gene regulatory networks in other types of cancer and diseases.
